Write QuickCheck docs (#694)
Concordium/concordium.github.io: source/mainnet/smart-contracts/guides/unit-test-contract.rst

        let amount1 = Amount::from_ccd(20);
        claim_eq!(host.get_transfers_to(receiver0), [amount0, amount1]);

.. _writing_property_based_tests:

Writing property-based tests
============================

> Property-based testing technique allows for testing statements about your code that expected to be true for any input parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The property-based testing technique allows for testing statements about your code that are expected to be true for any input parameters.
```

The input to such tests is generated randomly.
Property-based testing is supported using the |QuickCheck|_ crate.

> The tests should placed in the same module as Wasm unit tests and annotated with the ``#[concordium_quickcheck]`` macro.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tests should be placed in the same module as regular unit tests and annotated with the ``#[concordium_quickcheck]`` macro.
```

> The macro takes a named attribute ``num_tests`` for specifying the number of random tests to run.

Reviewer: Consider moving this line to the example, as that gives more context for the user to understand it. The user might not know what a named attribute is in a macro. But seeing it with the example makes it quite obvious.

> If no ``num_tests`` given, the default number is ``100``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no ``num_tests`` is given, the default number is ``100``.
```

> The return value of the function should be a boolean value with ``true`` corresponding to the fact that the property holds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The return value of the function should be a boolean corresponding to whether the property holds.
```

> In ``Cargo.toml``, ``concordium-std`` should be specified as a ``dev`` dependency with the ``concordium-quickcheck`` feature enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 (newline)
To get started, add the `concordium-quickcheck` feature to `concordium-std` as a `dev-dependency` In ``Cargo.toml``:
```

.. code-block::

    ...

    [dev-dependencies]
    concordium-std = { version = "5", features = ["concordium-quickcheck"] }

    ...

In the code snipped below, the parameters ``address`` and ``amount`` are randomly generated.
The process of generating random input and running the test is repeated ``num_tests = 500``.

.. code-block:: rust

    #[concordium_cfg_test]
    mod test {

       #[concordium_quickcheck(num_tests = 500)]
       fn some_property_test(address: Address, amount: Amount) -> bool {
        ...
        // Instantiate custom struct with random parameters.

>         let input = MyParameters { sender: address, payment: amount }

Reviewer: It is a bit unclear that this isn't always needed.

Author: Ok, I'll add "if necessary" :)

        ...
        }
    }

> The type like ``Address`` and ``Amount`` in the example have ``Arbitrary`` trait implementations, which are used to obtain random values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The types ``Address`` and ``Amount`` in the example have ``Arbitrary`` trait implementations, which are used to obtain random values.
```

Read more about available ``Arbitrary`` instances for Concordium-specific type in |concordium_contracts_common|_ documentation.

> ``Arbitrary`` instances for standard data types, like numbers and collections (``Vec``, ``BTreeMap``) are defined in |QuickCheck|_ and available automatically.

Reviewer: Perhaps?
```suggestion
``Arbitrary`` instances for standard data types, like numbers and collections (``Vec``, ``BTreeMap``) are defined in |QuickCheck|_ and available by default.
```

> Custom user data type instances can be created directly in tests using the random input parameters or by defining ``Arbitrary`` instances.

Reviewer: You should mention the `MyParameters` here.

See more details on QuickCheck's ``Arbitrary`` `here <https://docs.rs/quickcheck/latest/quickcheck/trait.Arbitrary.html>`_.

The same command is used for running Wasm QuickCheck tests as in :ref:`tests_in_wasm`:

.. code-block:: console

    cargo concordium test

When a test fails, it reports the random seed used to produce the input values.
After making the required fixes one can use the same seed to see whether the tests works on the same generated values.

> The seed is a ``u64`` number, which can be provided along with the test command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The seed is a ``u64`` number, which can be provided along with the test command:
```

.. code-block:: console

    cargo concordium test --seed 1234567890

> Concordium QuickCheck tests can also be run with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Concordium QuickCheck tests can also be run with:
```

.. code-block:: console

    cargo test

By default, this command compiles the contract, unit tests and QuickCheck tests to machine code for your local target (most likely x86_64), and runs them.

.. note::

    Printing and supplying a seed is only possible using ``cargo concordium test``.

.. warning::

>     Avoid using ``clam!`` and ``claim_eq!`` in ``#[concordium_quickcheck]`` tests.

Reviewer: Perhaps something like:

```suggestion
    Avoid using ``claim!``, ``assert_eq!``, ``panic!`` or any other command that panics in ``#[concordium_quickcheck]`` tests.
```

Author: I think `clam!` and `claim_eq!` are "special": they don't just panic when running with `cargo-concordium`, they call `ReportError`. Using `assert` in Wasm would just give `Unreachable`.

I'll clarify this here as well. Because `claim!` will produce a user defined error message and interrupt the test. So, the counterexample won't be printed.

Author: Fixed now.

    Using these makes tests fail without providing a counterexample when running tests with ``cargo concordium test``.
    Return a boolean value instead.

> Consider the following example.

Reviewer: Consider adding a sub-section, bold text, or similar for this example. Or at least make it clear that it is different from the general info about quickcheck.

Author: Done.

A counter that has a threshold: if the count is less then the threshold, it gets incremented, or stays unchanged otherwise.

.. code-block:: rust
   :emphasize-lines: 19-21

    use concordium_std::*;

    #[derive(Serialize)]
    struct State {
        threshold: u32,
        count:     u32,
    }

    impl State {
        fn new(threshold: u32) -> Self {
            State {
                count: 0,
                threshold,
            }
        }

        // Increment only if the current count is below the threshold.
        fn increment(&mut self) {

>             if self.count < self.threshold {

Author: Yes, I think it makes sense to reverse the presentation.

                self.count += 1;
            }
        }
    }

    #[init(contract = "my_contract")]
    fn contract_init<S: HasStateApi>(
        ctx: &impl HasInitContext,
        state_builder: &mut StateBuilder<S>,
    ) -> InitResult<State> { ... }

    #[receive(contract = "my_contract", name = "my_receive", mutable)]
    fn contract_update_counter<S: HasStateApi>(
        _ctx: &impl HasReceiveContext,
        host: &mut impl HasHost<State, StateApiType = S>,
    ) -> ReceiveResult<()> { ... }

    #[concordium_cfg_test]
    mod test {
        use super::*;

        // Property: counter stays below the threshold.
        // Run 1000 tests with random threshold values.
        #[concordium_quickcheck(num_tests = 1000)]
        fn prop_counter_never_above_threshold(threshold: u32) -> bool {
            let mut state = State::new(threshold);
            state.increment();
            state.count <= threshold
        }
    }

If we change the highlighted lines in the code above to

.. code-block:: rust

    if self.count <= self.threshold {
                self.count += 1;
            }

> The test fails with a counterexample (that is, an input that breaks the property).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test fails with a counterexample, i.e., an input that breaks the property:
```

        let amount1 = Amount::from_ccd(20);
        claim_eq!(host.get_transfers_to(receiver0), [amount0, amount1]);

.. _writing_property_based_tests:

Writing property-based tests
============================

The property-based testing technique allows for testing statements about your code that are expected to be true for any input parameters.
The input to such tests is generated randomly.
Property-based testing is supported using the |QuickCheck|_ crate.
The tests should be placed in the same module as regular unit tests and annotated with the ``#[concordium_quickcheck]`` macro.
The return value of the function should be a boolean corresponding to whether the property holds.

To get started, add the ``concordium-quickcheck`` feature to ``concordium-std`` as a ``dev``-dependency in ``Cargo.toml``:

.. code-block::

    ...

    [dev-dependencies]
    concordium-std = { version = "5", features = ["concordium-quickcheck"] }

    ...

> The ``concordium_quickcheck`` macro takes a named attribute ``num_tests`` for specifying the number of random tests to run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``concordium_quickcheck`` macro takes the ``num_tests`` attribute for specifying the number of random tests to run.
```

> In the code snipped below, the parameters ``address`` and ``amount`` are generated randomly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the code snippet below, the parameters ``address`` and ``amount`` are generated randomly.
```

       fn some_property_test(address: Address, amount: Amount) -> bool {
        ...
        // Instantiate custom struct with random parameters.
        let input = MyParameters { sender: address, payment: amount }
        ...
        }
    }

The types ``Address`` and ``Amount`` in the example have ``Arbitrary`` trait implementations, which are used to obtain random values.
Read more about available ``Arbitrary`` instances for Concordium-specific types in |concordium_contracts_common|_ documentation.
|QuickCheck|_ defines ``Arbitrary`` instances for standard data types, like numbers and collections (``Vec``, ``BTreeMap``, etc.).
These instances are available automatically when writing tests.
Custom user data type instances can be created directly in tests using the random input parameters or by defining ``Arbitrary`` instances.
See more details on QuickCheck's ``Arbitrary`` `here <https://docs.rs/quickcheck/latest/quickcheck/trait.Arbitrary.html>`_.

The same command is used for running Wasm QuickCheck tests as in :ref:`tests_in_wasm`:

.. code-block:: console

    $cargo concordium test

When a test fails, it reports the random seed used to produce the input values.

> After making the required fixes to the code, one can use the same seed to see whether the previously failed tests work on the same generated values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After making the required fixes to the code, you can use the same seed to see whether the previously failed tests work on the same generated values.
```

The seed is a ``u64`` number, which can be provided along with the test command:

.. code-block:: console

    $cargo concordium test --seed 1234567890

Concordium QuickCheck tests can also be run with:

.. code-block:: console

    $cargo test

By default, this command compiles the contract, unit tests, and QuickCheck tests to machine code for your local target (most likely x86_64) and runs them.

.. note::

    Printing and supplying a seed is only possible using ``cargo concordium test``.

.. warning::

    Avoid using ``fail!`` and ``claim!`` variants in ``#[concordium_quickcheck]`` tests.
    In Wasm unit tests (see :ref:`tests_in_wasm`) these commands report an error.

>     However, using them in QuickCheck tests, makes the tests fail without providing a counterexample when running with ``cargo concordium test``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    However, using them in QuickCheck tests makes the tests fail without providing a counterexample when running with ``cargo concordium test``.
```

>     Avoid also using ``assert_eq!``, ``panic!`` or any other command that panics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Also avoid using ``assert_eq!``, ``panic!`` or any other command that panics.
```

    Return a boolean value instead.

Example
-------

> Consider a counter with a threshold: if the count is less then the threshold, it gets incremented, or stays unchanged otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider a counter with a threshold: if the count is less than the threshold, it gets incremented; otherwise, it stays unchanged.
```

            if self.count <= self.threshold {
                self.count += 1;
            }
        }
    }

    #[init(contract = "my_contract")]
    fn contract_init<S: HasStateApi>(
        ctx: &impl HasInitContext,
        state_builder: &mut StateBuilder<S>,
    ) -> InitResult<State> { ... }

    #[receive(contract = "my_contract", name = "my_receive", mutable)]
    fn contract_update_counter<S: HasStateApi>(
        _ctx: &impl HasReceiveContext,
        host: &mut impl HasHost<State, StateApiType = S>,
    ) -> ReceiveResult<()> { ... }

    #[concordium_cfg_test]
    mod test {
        use super::*;

        // Property: counter stays below the threshold.
        // Run 1000 tests with random threshold values.
        #[concordium_quickcheck(num_tests = 1000)]
        fn prop_counter_never_above_threshold(threshold: u32) -> bool {
            let mut state = State::new(threshold);
            state.increment();
            state.count <= threshold
        }
    }

The test fails with a counterexample, i.e., an input that breaks the property:

.. code-block::

  TestResult {
    status: Fail,
    arguments: [
        "0",
    ],
    err: None,

> The ``arguments`` part shows the values that caused the test to fails.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``arguments`` part shows the values that caused the test to fail.
```

> In this case, if the threshold is ``0``, then the counter becomes ``1`` after calling ``state.increment()`` breaking the property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, if the threshold is ``0``, then the counter becomes ``1`` after calling ``state.increment()``, breaking the property.
```

.. note::

    |QuickCheck|_ implements a special mechanism called "shrinking" to find a simplest counterexample.
    For the example above, ``0`` is the simplest input on which the test failed.

> If we change the highlighted lines in the code above to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you change the highlighted lines in the code above to
```

.. code-block:: rust

    if self.count < self.threshold {
        self.count += 1;
    }

Then all ``500`` tests pass successfully.

.. note::

    The fact that many random tests passed successfully does not automatically mean that the property holds for **all** inputs.
    Often the input space is quite large to be covered fully.

>     In this case, it is importnat to think carefully what an implementation the ``Arbitrary`` trait is doing to generate random input for your specific data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In this case, it is important to think carefully about what an implementation of the ``Arbitrary`` trait is doing to generate random input for your specific data.
```

>     In order to cover corner cases, one can bias the generated data to produce values that a deemed as potentially problematic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    In order to cover corner cases, you can bias the generated data to produce values that are deemed as potentially problematic.
```

        let amount1 = Amount::from_ccd(20);
        claim_eq!(host.get_transfers_to(receiver0), [amount0, amount1]);

.. _writing_property_based_tests:

Writing property-based tests
============================

> The property-based testing technique allows for testing statements about your code that are expected to be true for any input parameters.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure this is very meaningful. Quite often one assumes some relationship between the inputs (i.e., ensure some precondition). So this phrasing is a bit misleading in my view.

Author: If one has a precondition then the property is an implication. When the precondition is not met, the test is discarded (that is, holds vacuously). 
I can make it more explicit that for any input that possibly satisfies certain validity criteria. Would it be better?

Author: I've added an explanation, a general "template" and an example of a property.

> The input to such tests is generated randomly.

Reviewer 3: Could you emphasize here what randomly entails. That one has to write a generator that generates meaningful inputs. And that the efficacy of the testing is heavily dependent on this.

Author: I have a note at the end of the docs after the example. Should I move it here?

Author: I converted a note into a warning a moved it right after I write about `Arbitrary`

       #[concordium_quickcheck(num_tests = 500)]
       fn some_property_test(address: Address, amount: Amount) -> bool {
        ...
        // Instantiate custom struct with random parameters, if necessary.
        let input = MyParameters { sender: address, payment: amount }
        ...
        }
    }

The types ``Address`` and ``Amount`` in the example have ``Arbitrary`` trait implementations, which are used to obtain random values.
Read more about available ``Arbitrary`` instances for Concordium-specific types in |concordium_contracts_common|_ documentation.
|QuickCheck|_ defines ``Arbitrary`` instances for standard data types, like numbers and collections (``Vec``, ``BTreeMap``, etc.).
These instances are available by default when writing tests.
Custom user data type instances, like ``MyParameters`` above, can be created directly in tests using the random input parameters or by defining ``Arbitrary`` instances.
See more details on QuickCheck's ``Arbitrary`` `here <https://docs.rs/quickcheck/latest/quickcheck/trait.Arbitrary.html>`_.

The same command is used for running Wasm QuickCheck tests as in :ref:`tests_in_wasm`:

.. code-block:: console

    $cargo concordium test

> When a test fails, it reports the random seed used to produce the input values.

Reviewer 3: Please explain here that all the random inputs are generated deterministically from the random seed. That is implied here, but it would be good to make it explicit for non-experts.

Author: Done.

After making the required fixes to the code, you can use the same seed to see whether the previously failed tests work on the same generated values.
The seed is a ``u64`` number, which can be provided along with the test command:

.. code-block:: console

    $cargo concordium test --seed 1234567890

Concordium QuickCheck tests can also be run with:

.. code-block:: console

    $cargo test

By default, this command compiles the contract, unit tests, and QuickCheck tests to machine code for your local target (most likely x86_64) and runs them.

.. note::

    Printing and supplying a seed is only possible using ``cargo concordium test``.

.. warning::

    Avoid using ``fail!`` and ``claim!`` variants in ``#[concordium_quickcheck]`` tests.
    In Wasm unit tests (see :ref:`tests_in_wasm`) these commands report an error.
    However, using them in QuickCheck tests makes the tests fail without providing a counterexample when running with ``cargo concordium test``.
    Also avoid using ``assert_eq!``, ``panic!`` or any other command that panics.
    Return a boolean value instead.

Example
-------

> Consider a counter with a threshold: if the count is less than the threshold, it gets incremented; otherwise, it stays unchanged.

Reviewer 3: While this example is good warm-up example, I would prefer if we have a more realistic one.

Is there something in the piggy-bank example that we could specify like this?

Author: I looked at `piggy-bank` with exactly this purpose. But all I could come up with looks as artificial as this example. However, once we integration testing, we could make a nice story about `piggy-bank` being a transition system and show some temporal properties, e.g. reachability of states over an arbitrary sequence of calls.

wCCD could be a possibility, but these examples would be more complex and require more background. I wanted to make a separate task of adding property tests to existing examples and then writing up some sort of tutorial, maybe explaining the methodology in more detail and showing how to write custom `Arbitrary`. Does it make sense?

Reviewer: While the current example is contrived I think it shows enough info to get started **if** you know something about property-based testing already. Perhaps we should link to some general information about property-based testing. Do you know any good beginner resources?

And I think a separate tutorial is a good idea.

Author: I don't think I have enough time to pick (or evaluate) good resources on property-based testing, if we plan to finish up with the PR today-ish. I can add *some* links, of course, just as initial pointers.

Reviewer: Ok, the link was just a suggestion, we can do it later 😊

Reviewer: Is it ready for another review?

Author: @Bargsteen yep, requested re-review :)

    fn contract_update_counter<S: HasStateApi>(
        _ctx: &impl HasReceiveContext,
        host: &mut impl HasHost<State, StateApiType = S>,
    ) -> ReceiveResult<()> { ... }

    #[concordium_cfg_test]
    mod test {
        use super::*;

        // Property: counter stays below the threshold for any number of calls `n`.
        // Run 500 tests with random `n` and `threshold` values.
        #[concordium_quickcheck(num_tests = 500)]
        fn prop_counter_always_below_threshold(threshold: u16, n: u16) -> bool {
            let mut state = State::new(threshold);
            for _ in 0..n {
                state.increment()
            }
            state.count <= threshold
        }
    }

The test fails with a counterexample, i.e., an input that breaks the property:

.. code-block::

    TestResult {
        status: Fail,
        arguments: [
            "0",
            "1",
        ],
        err: None,
    }

The ``arguments`` part shows the values that caused the test to fail.
In this case, if the threshold is ``0`` and the number of calls is ``1``, then the counter becomes ``1`` after calling ``state.increment()``, breaking the property.

.. note::

>     |QuickCheck|_ implements a special mechanism called "shrinking" to find a simplest counterexample.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    |QuickCheck|_ implements a special mechanism called "shrinking" to find the simplest counterexample.
```

        let amount1 = Amount::from_ccd(20);
        claim_eq!(host.get_transfers_to(receiver0), [amount0, amount1]);

.. _writing_property_based_tests:

Writing property-based tests
============================

The property-based testing technique allows for testing statements about your code that are expected to be true for any input parameters, possibly satisfying some precondition.
You can think of a precondition and a property as functions returning a boolean.
That is, for a function ``fun``, a property looks as the following: "for any input ``x``, ``y``, ``z``, such that ``precondition(x, y, z) = true``, ``property(x, y, z, fun(x,y,z)) = true``".
The input to such tests is generated randomly.

> An example of a property is "for any integers ``n`` and ``m``, such that ``even(n) = true`` and ``even(m) = true``, ``even(n + m) = true``".

Reviewer: This section is a great addition! Very concise and easy to understand. Nice work ;)
